More Code-related anti-patterns added (Documentation) (#12790)
elixir-lang/elixir: lib/elixir/pages/anti-patterns/code-anti-patterns.md

## Complex extractions in clauses

#### Problem

When we use multi-clause functions, it is possible to extract values in the clauses for further usage and for pattern matching/guard checking. This extraction itself does not represent an anti-pattern, but when you have too many clauses or too many arguments, it becomes hard to know which extracted parts are used for pattern/guards and what is used only inside the function body. This anti-pattern is related to [Unrelated multi-clause function](https://github.com/elixir-lang/elixir/blob/main/lib/elixir/pages/anti-patterns/design-anti-patterns.md#unrelated-multi-clause-function), but with implications of its own. It impairs the code readability in a different way.

#### Example

> The multi-clause function `drive/1` is extracting fields of an `%User{}` struct for usage in the clause expression (`age`) and for usage in the function body (`name`). Ideally, a function should not mix pattern matching extractions for usage in its clauses expressions and also in the function body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The multi-clause function `drive/1` is extracting fields of an `%User{}` struct for usage in the clause expression (`age`) and for usage in the function body (`name`). Ideally, a function should not mix pattern matching extractions for usage in its guard expressions and also in its body.
```

```elixir
def drive(%User{name: name, age: age}) when age >= 18 do
  "#{name} can drive"
end

def drive(%User{name: name, age: age}) when age < 18 do
  "#{name} cannot drive"
end
```

> While the example is small and looks like a clear code, try to imagine a situation where `drive/1` was more complex, having many more clauses, arguments, and extractions. This is the really smelly code!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the example is small and looks like a clear code, try to imagine a situation where `drive/1` was more complex, having many more clauses, arguments, and extractions.
```

#### Refactoring

As shown below, a possible solution to this anti-pattern is to extract only pattern/guard related variables in the signature once you have many arguments or multiple clauses:

```elixir
def drive(%User{age: age} = user) when age >= 18 do
  %User{name: name} = user
  "#{name} can drive"
end

def drive(%User{age: age} = user) when age < 18 do
  %User{name: name} = user
  "#{name} cannot drive"
end
```

## Dynamic map fields access

#### Problem

> In Elixir, it is possible to access values from `Maps`, which are key-value data structures, either strictly or dynamically. When trying to dynamically access the value of a key from a `Map`, if the informed key does not exist, a null value (`nil`) will be returned. This return can be confusing and does not allow developers to conclude whether the key is non-existent in the `Map` or just has no bound value. In this way, this anti-pattern may cause bugs in the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Elixir, it is possible to access values from `Maps`, which are key-value data structures, either statically or dynamically. When trying to dynamically access the value of a key from a `Map`, if the informed key does not exist, `nil` is returned. This return can be confusing and does not allow developers to conclude whether the key is non-existent in the `Map` or just has no bound value. In this way, this anti-pattern may cause bugs in the code.
```

```elixir
defmodule Graphics do
  def plot(point) do
    #Some other code...

    # Dynamic access to use point values
    {point[:x], point[:y], point[:z]}
  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> point_2d = %{x: 2, y: 3}
%{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point_3d = %{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
%{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
iex> Graphics.plot(point_2d)
{2, 3, nil}   # <= ambiguous return
iex> Graphics.plot(point_3d)
{5, 6, nil}
```

As can be seen in the example above, even when the key `:z` does not exist in the `Map` (`point_2d`), dynamic access returns the value `nil`. This return can be dangerous because of its ambiguity. It is not possible to conclude from it whether the `Map` has the key `:z` or not. If the function relies on the return value to make decisions about how to plot a point, this can be problematic and even cause errors when testing the code.

#### Refactoring

> To remove this anti-pattern, whenever a `Map` has keys of `Atom` type, replace the dynamic access to its values per strict access. When a non-existent key is strictly accessed, Elixir raises an error immediately, allowing developers to find bugs faster. The next code illustrates the refactoring of `plot/1`, removing this anti-pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove this anti-pattern, whenever a `Map` has keys of `Atom` type, replace the dynamic access to its values by the `map.field`syntax. When a non-existent key is statically accessed, Elixir raises an error immediately, allowing developers to find bugs faster. The next code illustrates the refactoring of `plot/1`, removing this anti-pattern:
```

```elixir
defmodule Graphics do
  def plot(point) do
    #Some other code...

    # Strict access to use point values
    {point.x, point.y, point.z}
  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> point_2d = %{x: 2, y: 3}
%{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point_3d = %{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
%{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
iex> Graphics.plot(point_2d)
** (KeyError) key :z not found in: %{x: 2, y: 3} # <= explicitly warns that
  graphic.ex:6: Graphics.plot/1                  # <= the :z key does not exist!
iex> Graphics.plot(point_3d)
{5, 6, nil}
```

> As shown below, another alternative to refactor this anti-pattern is to replace a `Map` with a `struct` (named map). By default, structs only support strict access to values. In this way, accesses will always return clear and objective results:
> 
> ```elixir
> defmodule Point do
>   @enforce_keys [:x, :y]
>   defstruct [x: nil, y: nil]
> end
> ```
> 
> ```elixir
> iex> point = %Point{x: 2, y: 3}
> %Point{x: 2, y: 3}
> iex> point.x   # <= strict access to use point values
> 2
> iex> point.z   # <= trying to access a non-existent key
> ** (KeyError) key :z not found in: %Point{x: 2, y: 3}
> iex> point[:x] # <= by default, struct does not support dynamic access
> ** (UndefinedFunctionError) ... (Point does not implement the Access behaviour)

Reviewer: ````suggestion
As shown below, another alternative to refactor this anti-pattern is to use pattern matching:

```elixir
defmodule Graphics do
  def plot(%{x: x, y: y, z: z}) do
    #Some other code...

    # Strict access to use point values
    {x, y, z}
  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> point_2d = %{x: 2, y: 3}
%{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point_3d = %{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
%{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
iex> Graphics.plot(point_2d)
** (FunctionClauseError)  no function clause matching in Graphics.plot/1
  graphic.ex:2: Graphics.plot/1                  # <= the :z key does not exist!
iex> Graphics.plot(point_3d)
{5, 6, nil}
```

Another alternative is to use structs. By default, structs only support static access to its fields, promoting cleaner patterns:

```elixir
defmodule Point.2D do
  @enforce_keys [:x, :y]
  defstruct [x: nil, y: nil]
end
```

```elixir
iex> point = %Point.2D{x: 2, y: 3}
%Point.2D{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point.x   # <= strict access to use point values
2
iex> point.z   # <= trying to access a non-existent key
** (KeyError) key :z not found in: %Point{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point[:x] # <= by default, struct does not support dynamic access
** (UndefinedFunctionError) ... (Point does not implement the Access behaviour)
```

```elixir
defmodule Graphics do
  def plot(%{x: x, y: y, z: z}) do
    #Some other code...

    # Strict access to use point values
    {x, y, z}
  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> point_2d = %{x: 2, y: 3}
%{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point_3d = %{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
%{x: 5, y: 6, z: nil}
iex> Graphics.plot(point_2d)
** (FunctionClauseError)  no function clause matching in Graphics.plot/1
  graphic.ex:2: Graphics.plot/1                  # <= the :z key does not exist!
iex> Graphics.plot(point_3d)
{5, 6, nil}
```

Another alternative is to use structs. By default, structs only support static access to its fields, promoting cleaner patterns:

```elixir
defmodule Point.2D do
  @enforce_keys [:x, :y]
  defstruct [x: nil, y: nil]
end
```

```elixir
iex> point = %Point.2D{x: 2, y: 3}
%Point.2D{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point.x   # <= strict access to use point values
2
iex> point.z   # <= trying to access a non-existent key
** (KeyError) key :z not found in: %Point{x: 2, y: 3}
iex> point[:x] # <= by default, struct does not support dynamic access
** (UndefinedFunctionError) ... (Point does not implement the Access behaviour)
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
